You know what let's go to dusty. Yeski.
All right. Okay.
Let's do it. So my favorite novel of his is, uh, the idiot. First of all,
I see myself as the idiot and an idiot, and I,
I love the optimism and the love, the main character has for the world.
So that just deeply connects with me as a novel, uh, uh,
notes from underground as well.
But what ideas of doki do you think are
existentialists? What ideas are formative to the whole existentialist movement?
Excellent. So let me talk about the brothers, Karen mosso. Yes.
Partly because that's the last novel that doki wrote.
I think it's certainly of the greatest novels of the 19th century, uh,
may be the best and I'm about to teach it in a few weeks.
So I'm super excited about it, but what is,
what is the brother's Kara mosso about? I mean, without, you know,
without spoiling the ending for anyone spoiler alert. Yeah. I mean, look, it's,
it's a murder mystery, right? I mean, the father gets murdered. Yeah.
And the question is who did it? Who's responsible for it. So there's,
there's a notion of responsibility here, like art,
but it's responsibility for a murder. That's what we're talking about.
And there's a bunch of brothers,
each of a whom <laugh> has pretty good motivation for having
more murdered the father. The father's a jerk. I mean, he's, you know,
if anybody is worthy of being murdered, he's the guy he's, he's,
he's a force of chaos and he's nasty in all sorts of ways,
but still it's not, not good to murder people. <laugh> so, so what's the,
what's the view of dusts. I mean,
it's this intense exploration of what it means to be involved
in various ways with an activity that everyone can
recognize as atrocious
and what the right way is to take responsibility for that,
what the right way to relate to others in the face of it and
how even through this kind of action,
you can achieve some kind of salvation. That's, dosy S's word for it.
You can li and,
but salvation here and now not like you live some afterlife
where you're, you know, paradise for eternal,
who cares about that says one of the characters that doesn't make my life
now any good,
and it doesn't justify any of the bad things that happen in my life. Now,
what matters is can we live well in the face of these things that
we do and have to take responsibility for?
So it's this intense exploration of notions and
gradations of guilt and responsibility and the possibility of
love and salvation in the face of those.
It is incredibly human work and here,
but I think doki is the opposite of SART mm-hmm <affirmative>. And let me just,
I think it's so fascinating. I don't know anybody else who notices this,
but SART in SART actually quotes a passage from Dostoevsky when he's
developing his view, mm-hmm <affirmative> is close to a passage.
It doesn't appear quite in this way, but the passage that SART quote is,
is this is, is in the form of an argument.
SAR puts it in the form of an argument. He says, um, look, there's a,
a conditional statement is true. If there is no, God,
then everything is permitted mm-hmm <affirmative> and then there's a second
premise. There is no God that's start's view. I mean, he's an atheist.
There is no God conclusion.
Everything is permitted <laugh> and that starts radical freedom.
And if you think about the structure of the brothers Karas off,
I think DSKY though, he never says it this way would run.
The argument differently is a Motus tollens instead of a Motus bons,
the argument for, for, to AKI would go like this. Yeah. Conditional statement.
If there is no, God, then everything is permitted. But look at your life,
not everything is permitted.
<laugh> you do horrible atrocious things like be involved in the
death of your father. And there is a price to pay.
That's not a livable moment you to take,
to have to take responsibility,
to have to recognize that you are at fault,
or you are somehow guilty for having been involved in whatever way you were in
letting that happen or bringing it up that it does happen is to pay a price.
So we're not beings that are constituted such a way that everything
is permitted. Look at the facts of your existence.
So not everything is permitted.
Therefore there is a God <laugh> <laugh> that's and,
and, and the, and the, and the presence of a God for dusty, I think,
is just found in this fact that when we do bad things,
we feel guilty for them that we find ourselves to be responsible for things,
even when we didn't intend to do them,
but we just allowed ourselves to be involved in them. And.
The nature of God for just Eski is, I mean, unclear. I mean,
it's a very complex exploration in itself, and he basically,
God speaks through several of his characters in, in complicated ways. Yeah.
So it's not like a trivial UHS version.
Of God. It's totally not trivial. And it's not a,
a being that exists outside of time and right.
None of that is sort of relevant for dusty Ky for him.
It's a question about how we live our lives.
Do we live our lives in the mood that Christianity says it makes available to
us, which is the mood of joy.